gh-131933: Document UnionType/Union merger in What's New (#131941)
python/cpython: Doc/whatsnew/3.14.rst

  (Contributed by Marie Roald and Yngve Mardal Moe in :gh:`126350`.)

types
-----

* :class:`types.UnionType` is now an alias for :class:`typing.Union`
  See :ref:`below <whatsnew314-typing-union>` for more details.

>   (Contributed by Jelle Zijlstra in :gh:`105499`.)
> 
> typing
> ------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  (Contributed by Jelle Zijlstra in :gh:`105499`.)

typing
------
```

.. _whatsnew314-typing-union:

* :class:`types.UnionType` and :class:`typing.Union` are now aliases for each other,
  meaning that both old-style unions (created with ``Union[int, str]``) and new-style
  unions (``int | str``) now create instances of the same runtime type. This unifies
  the behavior between the two syntaxes, but leads to some differences in behavior that

>   may affect users who introspect types at runtime:

Reviewer: Should this be listed under https://docs.python.org/3.14/whatsnew/3.14.html#porting-to-python-3-14 instead? (I mean, the differences)

Author: I am adding a cross-reference there instead, I feel it's more discoverable listing it under the `typing` header.

    ``repr()``. For example, ``repr(Union[int, str])``
    is now ``"int | str"`` instead of ``"typing.Union[int, str]"``.
  - Unions created using the old syntax are no longer cached. Previously, running
    ``Union[int, str]`` multiple times would return the same object
    (``Union[int, str] is Union[int, str]`` would be ``True``), but now it will
    return two different objects. Users should use ``==`` to compare unions for equality, not
    ``is``. New-style unions already worked this way in earlier versions.
  - Previously, old-style unions were implemented using the private class
    ``typing._UnionGenericAlias``. This class is no longer needed for the implementation,
    but it has been retained for backward compatibility, with removal scheduled for Python
    3.17. Users should use documented introspection helpers like :func:`typing.get_origin`
    and :func:`typing.get_args` instead of relying on private implementation details.
  - It is now possible to use :class:`typing.Union` in :func:`isinstance` checks.
  - The ``__args__`` attribute of :class:`typing.Union` objects is no longer writable.

> 
>   (Contributed by Jelle Zijlstra in :gh:`105499`.)
> 
> unicodedata

Reviewer: ```suggestion

  (Contributed by Jelle Zijlstra in :gh:`105499`.)

unicodedata
```

  (Contributed by Marie Roald and Yngve Mardal Moe in :gh:`126350`.)

types
-----

> * :class:`types.UnionType` is now an alias for :class:`typing.Union`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* :class:`types.UnionType` is now an alias for :class:`typing.Union`.
```

  See :ref:`below <whatsnew314-typing-union>` for more details.
  (Contributed by Jelle Zijlstra in :gh:`105499`.)

typing
------

.. _whatsnew314-typing-union:

* :class:`types.UnionType` and :class:`typing.Union` are now aliases for each other,
  meaning that both old-style unions (created with ``Union[int, str]``) and new-style
  unions (``int | str``) now create instances of the same runtime type. This unifies
  the behavior between the two syntaxes, but leads to some differences in behavior that
  may affect users who introspect types at runtime:

  - Both syntaxes for creating a union now produce the same string representation in
    ``repr()``. For example, ``repr(Union[int, str])``
    is now ``"int | str"`` instead of ``"typing.Union[int, str]"``.
  - Unions created using the old syntax are no longer cached. Previously, running
    ``Union[int, str]`` multiple times would return the same object
    (``Union[int, str] is Union[int, str]`` would be ``True``), but now it will
    return two different objects. Users should use ``==`` to compare unions for equality, not

>     ``is``. New-style unions already worked this way in earlier versions.

Reviewer 3: this might concern users who care about memory usage; worth pointing out explicitly here that we believe this will not be a significant concern due to PEP-649?

Author: Added some comments here. It's not just PEP 649.

>     ``is``. New-style unions already worked this way in earlier versions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    ``is``. New-style unions have never been cached in this way.
```

  - Previously, old-style unions were implemented using the private class
    ``typing._UnionGenericAlias``. This class is no longer needed for the implementation,
    but it has been retained for backward compatibility, with removal scheduled for Python
    3.17. Users should use documented introspection helpers like :func:`typing.get_origin`
    and :func:`typing.get_args` instead of relying on private implementation details.

>   - It is now possible to use :class:`typing.Union` in :func:`isinstance` checks.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps note here that the tuple-style is still preferred? I think I saw @AlexWaygood note something similar with using new-style unions in `isinstance`.

Reviewer 3: This has been true since 3.10 I think, actually, as well — has anything changed in this regard on 3.14?

Author: This text was written confusingly, it refers to this behavior change:

```
$ python3.13 -c 'import typing; print(isinstance(typing.Union[int, str], typing.Union))'
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<string>", line 1, in <module>
    import typing; print(isinstance(typing.Union[int, str], typing.Union))
                         ~~~~~~~~~~^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
  File "/opt/homebrew/Cellar/python@3.13/3.13.1/Frameworks/Python.framework/Versions/3.13/lib/python3.13/typing.py", line 569, in __instancecheck__
    raise TypeError(f"{self} cannot be used with isinstance()")
TypeError: typing.Union cannot be used with isinstance()
$ ./python.exe -c 'import typing; print(isinstance(typing.Union[int, str], typing.Union))'
True
```

Nothing to do with using union objects in `isinstance` (the 3.10 change), it's about using `Union` itself.

Author: Reworded, hopefully clearer now

Reviewer 3: Much clearer, thanks!

  (Contributed by Jelle Zijlstra in :gh:`105499`.)

typing
------

.. _whatsnew314-typing-union:

* :class:`types.UnionType` and :class:`typing.Union` are now aliases for each other,
  meaning that both old-style unions (created with ``Union[int, str]``) and new-style
  unions (``int | str``) now create instances of the same runtime type. This unifies
  the behavior between the two syntaxes, but leads to some differences in behavior that
  may affect users who introspect types at runtime:

  - Both syntaxes for creating a union now produce the same string representation in
    ``repr()``. For example, ``repr(Union[int, str])``
    is now ``"int | str"`` instead of ``"typing.Union[int, str]"``.
  - Unions created using the old syntax are no longer cached. Previously, running
    ``Union[int, str]`` multiple times would return the same object
    (``Union[int, str] is Union[int, str]`` would be ``True``), but now it will
    return two different objects. Users should use ``==`` to compare unions for equality, not
    ``is``. New-style unions have never been cached this way.
    This change could increase memory usage for some programs that use a large number of

>     unions, but unions used in annotations are no longer evaluated by default in Python 3.14
>     (because of :pep:`649`), the new union object is itself much smaller, and removing the
>     cache also saves some space, so it is unlikely that this change will cause a significant
>     increase in memory usage.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    unions using ``typing.Union`` subscripts. However, this is offset by the fact that
    unions used in annotations are no longer evaluated by default in Python 3.14
    (because of :pep:`649`), the fact that an instance of :class:`types.UnionType` is
    itself much smaller than the object returned by ``Union[]`` was on prior Python
    versions, and the fact that removing the cache also saves some space. it is therefore
    unlikely that this change will cause a significant increase in memory usage for most
    users.
```

Author: I don't like the repetition of "the fact that" but I appreciate that my sentence got too long, I'll push another rewrite.

Reviewer 3: yeah I didn't like that aspect of my suggestion either, feel free to tweak it 😆

Author: How about this?

Reviewer 3: LGTM!
